---
title: "Loops I: Arithmetic Sums"
category: "UIL Written"
date: 2024-03-08
---

## Part 1: Body Independent Loops
Let's try to code trace this example problem.

```java
int c = 0;
for (int i = 3; i <= 6; i++) {
    c++;
}
out.print(c);
```

Our goal is to find how many times `c` is incremented (which also means how many times the loop was iterated).
Just off intuition, we might conclude that $c = 6 - 3 = 3$.
But $i$ iterates through $\{3, 4, 5, 6\}$, which is $4$.
In fact, for any $[a,b]$ pair where $b \geq a$, the number of integer values in the interval will be $b - a + 1$.

How about this code example?
```java
int c = 0;
for (int i = 3; i < 6; i++) {
    c++;
}
out.print(c);
```
Since we don't iterate on $6$, this will output $3$.
Here, our intuitive answer of $6 - 3 = 3$ does work.
In fact, for any $[a,b)$ pair where $b \geq a$, the number of integer values in the interval will be $b - a$.

You use this type of logic every day: whenever you iterate through an array.
```java
int[] wannaDouble = new int[N];
int c = 0;
for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
    wannaDouble[i] *= 2;
    c++;
}
out.print(c);
```
If $c < N$, you wouldn't have accessed every part of the array.
And if $c > N$, you would've caught an array out of bounds exception!

Let's try a variation of this simple loop.
```java
int c = 0;
for (int i = 1; i <= 10; i += 2) {
    c++;
}
out.print(c);
```
Since we are incrementing by $2$ instead of $1$, maybe the answer is $(10 - 1 + 1) / 2 = 5$, which is indeed the correct answer.

How about this example?
```java
int c = 0;
for (int i = 1; i <= 11; i += 2) {
    c++;
}
out.print(c);
```
If we apply the same logic, we get $(11 - 1 + 1) / 2 = 5.5$
We can't have $5.5$ iterations, so our next step would be to either round up or round down.
If we manually code trace this, we will see that we are iterating through $\{1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11\}$,
which is $6$ values. So it seems that we should always round up.

If we want to find the last value in the iteration, it is a good idea to normalize the values to $0$.
For example, let's take this code snippet.
```java
for (int i = 3; i <= 102; i += 7) {
    out.println(i);
}
```
We can normalize this for loop to start at $0$ like this:
```java
for (int i = 0; i <= 99; i += 7) {
    out.println(i);
}
```

Then, find the greatest multiple of $7 < 99$, which is $14 \times 7 = 98$.
Since our value $98$ is less than or equal to the upper bound $99$, this will be the last value printed minus the lower bound of $3$.
If the loop was exclusive, we would need to check if it was $<$, not $\leq$.
If the condition does fail, we need to subtract by the increment $7$ until our condition is satisfied.

If our goal was to see what the total output of this loop was, remember that this is a multiple choice exam.
We can use our formula $\lceil(b - a + 1) / c\rceil$ to see how many values should be in the loop, which in this case $\lceil(102 - 3 + 1) / 7\rceil = 15$.
The correct answer will have $15$ values, start at $3$, and increment by $7$.

Finally, if we have nested loops that are independent of each other, like below:
```java
int c = 0;
for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
    for (int j = 0; j < M; j++) {
        c++;
    }
}
out.print(c);
```
$c$ is simply $N \times M$ (or how many times the loop would iterate times each other).

All of our examples work with backwards loops as well, just don't be stupid and adapt the techniques as appropriate.

## Part 2: Body Dependent Loops
Let's look at this code example.
```java
int c = 0;
for (int i = 1; i <= 8; i++) {
    c += i;
}
out.print(c);
```

For this, it would be ideal to derive an expression for the sum of the first $N$ positive integers.
For the sake of this derivation, we will include $0$ because it will be easier to visualize, even if it doesn't contribute to our sum.

We have $N + 1$ values (because we are including $0$), and our maximum value is $N$.
Let's call the answer to our problem $c$ (like in the code example).
Since in our example, $N = 8$, let's draw a $9 \times 8 = N \times (N + 1)$ sized box.

```
#########
#########
#########
#########
#########
#########
#########
#########
```

We are obviously overcounting; we need to remove $1$ from the 2nd column, $2$ from the 3rd column, continuing until we get to the last column, where we need to remove $8$ (to get $0$).
```
#
##
###
####
#####
######
#######
########
```

The total area $c$ of this shape is:
$$
N \times (N + 1) - 1 - 2 - \ldots - (N - 1) - N 
$$
$$
N \times (N + 1) - (1 + 2 + \ldots + (N - 1) + N)
$$
$$
N \times (N + 1) - c
$$

So, 
$$
c = N \times (N + 1) - c
$$
$$
2c = N \times (N + 1)
$$

$$
c = \frac{N \times (N + 1)}{2}
$$

Plugging $N = 8$, we get $36$, which is the output of the code.
This formula should be committed to memory.
From now on in this post:
$$
\sigma(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^{x} k = \frac{x \times (x + 1)}{2}
$$

$$
\sigma^2(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^{x} k^2 = \frac{x \times (x + 1) \times (2 \times x + 1)}{6}
$$

$$
\sigma^3(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^{x} k^3 = (\sigma(x))^2
$$
[Derivations](https://brilliant.org/wiki/sum-of-n-n2-or-n3/)

For fun, we can define:
$$
\sigma^0(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^{x} k^0 = x + 1
$$
Excerise for the reader: Find out why it's $x + 1$ and not $x$?

Let's look at this problem.
```java
int c = 0;
for (int k = 0; k < 10; k++) {
    c += k * k + 2 * k;
}
out.print(c);
```
We can break this down into:
$$
\sum_{k = 0}^{9} k^2 + 2k
$$

$$
\sum_{k = 0}^{9} k^2 + 2\sum_{k = 0}^{9} k
$$

$$
\sigma^2(9) + 2\sigma(9) = 375
$$

Pretty simple, right?

Let's look at an actual question, problem 12 from 2019 UIL Region.
```java
int s = 0;
for (int q = 1; q < 11; q += 2)
    for (int r = 0; r < q; r++)
        s = s + r;
out.print(s);
```
It might be faster to manually do the code tracing (and spot the pattern).
But for right now, let's try to use our newly found techniques.

The inner loop can simply be broken down into:
$$
\sum_{r = 0}^{q - 1} r = \sigma(q - 1) = \frac{q \times (q - 1)}{2}
$$

Let's put this in another summation to deal with the outer loop, adjusting to loop through only the odd numbers we care about.
$$
\sum_{q = 1}^{5} \frac{(2q - 1)(2q - 2)}{2}
$$

$$
\sum_{q = 1}^{5} \frac{4q^2 - 6q + 2}{2}
$$

$$
\sum_{q = 1}^{5} 2q^2 - 3q + 1
$$

$$
2\sum_{q = 1}^{5} q^2 - 3\sum_{q = 1}^{5} q + 5
$$

$$
2\sigma^2(5) - 3\sigma(5) + 5 = 70
$$

Fun fact: The sum of the first $N$ positive odd numbers is $N^2$ (try to see why using our formulas).

You can also use the standard precalculus formulas whenever applicable:
$$
\frac{n(2a + (n - 1)d)}{2}
$$

$$
\frac{n(a_1 + a_n)}{2}
$$

All of these techniques are most useful when you have fairly large numbers and code tracing would become a large time commitment.
